---
title: "Forks, branches and Markdown format"
author: "Radhika Khetani"
date: 2017-07-06
duration: 45
---

In this lesson we will **first make a personal copy of the ngs course repository by `fork`ing it**. A fork in the context of a repo is like a fork in the road, it usually doesn't meet back with the original road (repo). So, your fork will not be updated with any of our changes, and any changes you make will be your own.

To **fork the repo**, use the "Fork" button at the top right hand corner.

Next, **change to the `May2017` branch of the repo** by clicking on the "Branch" button on the top left hand corner and selecting the other branch. 

Now, **click on the `README.md` file**. This page is what shows up when you scroll down on the main page of the repo (go back and check!); by default if you create an `README.md` file in your repo (main directory, not within a subdirectory), the content of that file will be displayed on the first page of the repo.

You are all going to **modify this README markdown** and customize it with any information that you desire (note that this repo is public). You can start from scratch if you prefer. **[This tutorial](https://guides.github.com/features/mastering-markdown/#examples)** is what we are going to use as a guide for Markdown syntax. 

**To start editing, click on the pencil icon** on the right side (close to the top). 

Below are some suggested changes that we are going to make. 

* Add a new header (if starting from scratch add a header) with a title `<h1>` and a subtitle `<h3>`
* Add a couple of sentences describing the sessions that you want to go back and check often, and *italicize* or **bold** them
* Add a sentence about the Wiki page and link to it
* Add a short note about how to log into Orchestra and enclose the following commands in a bash code chunk: `ssh` and command for starting an interactive session `bsub`
* Add another note about the `getwd()` and `sessionInfo()` functions, and highlight them inline as separate words
* Modify the list of sessions to be a numbered list instead of a bulleted list

You have probably noticed this by now, but Markdown requires you to use matching syntax on both sides of the code/phrase/other that you are trying to format.

Once you add a couple of changes, check out the preview of the changes. *Does the formatting match your expectations?*

After you are done with changes, commit them by clicking on the commit button down below, and make sure to add a message to remind yourself what this commit was all about.

> You can remove anything that you don't wish to have on the main page of your repo, i.e. in the README file and commit the changes to have a "clean" README.

***
If you want to learn about any additional formatting that we used, you can look at some of the lessons in "Edit" mode.

### Resources:

* [https://help.github.com/articles/basic-writing-and-formatting-syntax/](https://help.github.com/articles/basic-writing-and-formatting-syntax/)
* [https://github.com/adam-p/markdown-here/wiki/Markdown-Cheatsheet](https://github.com/adam-p/markdown-here/wiki/Markdown-Cheatsheet)


***
### Exercise:

Clone this repo to your computer and `checkout` the "May2017" branch.

***
